We have instincts that compel us to seek connection with coalitions of other. Once we have been accepted into the group, we strive to achieve their approval and acclaim.

'Along with status comes better food, more abundant territory, superior health care.' It leads to greater access to preferred mates and ' bestows on children social opportunities' that youngsters in low ranking families miss out on. When researchers analysed 186 premodern societies around the world, they found men of higher status 'invariably had greater wealth and more wives and provided better nourishment for their children'. This was, and remains, the secret of maximising our capacity for survival and reproduction: the higher we rise, the more likely we are to live, love and procreate. It's the essence of human thriving. It's the status game.

A wide range of research finds people with depression tend to belong to 'far fewer' groups than the rest of the population. Studies across time suggest the more a depressed person identifies with their group - the more of their own sense of self they invest in it - the more their symptoms lift.

Disconnection is a fearsome state for a social animal to find itself in. It's a warning that its life is failing and its world has become hostile: where there's no connection, there's no protection. Isolation damages us so profoundly it can change who we are. It can force us into a 'defensive crouch' in which we seek to fend off threat of further rejection. Our perceptions of other people become warped. They start to appear 'more critical, competitive or denigrating, or otherwise unwelcoming'. These faulty interpretations 'quickly become expectations'.

In one study, participants were told they were taste-testing chocolate chip cookies. Before the test began, they were asked to mingle with other tasters then told to choose two they'd like to work with. Some were told (falsely) that nobody had picked them; others that everyone had. The first group, who'd been socially rejected,  went on to eat an average of nine cookies more than the non-rejected: nearly twice the number. Most of them even rated the taste of the cookies more highly, implying their rejection actually altered their perceptions of the sugary food.

But connection itself doesn't make for a successful life. We're rarely content to linger on the lowest social rungs of our groups, likeable but useless. We desire worth, acclaim, to be of value.

When life is a game that we are losing, we hurt. One review of the scientific literature found that 'perceiving oneself as having low rank compared to others is consistently linked to higher depressive symptoms'. Some psychologists argue that when we become depressed we 'mentally withdraw from the competition for higher status'. This keeps us off 'high-status individuals' radars' and conserves energy, helping us cope with the 'reduced opportunities imposed by low status'.

Frequent defeat in the status game has us scuttling off to the grey safety of the back of the cave. In the sanctuary of those shadows, our inner monologue can turn on us, becoming hypercritical in a process known as self-subordination. We talk ourselves down in an onslaught of insult, convincing ourselves that the fight is useless, that we belong at the bottom, that we can only ever fail.

When we're chronically deprived of status, the mind may even turn against itself and cause its own destruction. Although the causes of suicide are many and complex, lack of status is a known common driver. Tellingly, it's sudden movements down the game that can be most dangerous. Suicide 'concentrates among those who experience an increase in their social inferiority'. and occurs mostly 'when people fall below others'.

Those who decide to end their lives, finally quit the game that's caused such agony, might have experienced a recent financial loss, or have been made unemployed. They might've lost reputation. They might have simply stayed still whilst others have accelerated away from them: 'suicide is encouraged not just by falling, but by falling behind'.